The signs were there but subtle. Dustin Chandler never did his homework. He was labeled lazy at school. It wasn’t until years later when his mother, now working at a pediatric clinic, watched him struggle to renovate his first house that something clicked. “Son, I’m sorry for this,” she told him. “But you need to go get tested for ADHD.”

Chandler was officially diagnosed at 25. He learned that the developmental disorder could be passed on to his children, so he and his wife looked for signs in their kids. Like her father, their second child, a daughter, seemed to be the quiet, daydreamy type. She enjoyed reading independently since she could go at her own pace, and she excelled when her teacher taught her one-on-one. In elementary school, however, their concerns increased during a math challenge where students had to solve as many problems as possible within a minute, and she worked too slowly. In second grade, she was diagnosed with ADHD.

While doctors and researchers still aren’t sure of the exact cause of the disorder, “the predominant theory,” explains Stephen Rush, a professor of psychiatry at the University of Cincinnati, “is primarily genetics and the biology of what’s going on in the brain that seems to be associated with it.” Studies show that about 80 percent of the time there is a similar genetic component found among people who have ADHD compared to people who do not have it. 

Scientists have discovered that people with the disorder experience specific brain chemistry changes as their dopamine and norepinephrine systems are dysregulated. These compounds, which are strongly associated with the ability to maintain concentration, seem to become depleted more quickly. “Dopamine is in charge of motivation, focus, and reward processing,” Frances Javier, psychiatrist and medical director at Neuro Wellness Spa in Marina del Rey, California, explains. “Norepinephrine is in charge of alertness, attention, and arousal, and these are the two main targets of stimulant medications for ADHD.”
